From: "Mark  Alker" <Mark@?alker?.softnet.co.uk>
Subject: Memory does exist
Date: 06 Nov 1998 00:00:00 GMT
Organization: Customer of Planet Online
Newsgroups: uk.rec.cycling

Its true.  The so called memory effect of Nicad batteries does exist.
However the label 'memory' has come to refer to a different phenomenon than
its original meaning.  It used to refer to what is known as Cyclic Memory.
This is the seeming ability of a battery to remember how much discharge was
required on previous discharges!?(if you dont use up all the cells capacity
then it wont charge up fully next time).  Research by Black n Decker !? has
shown that with the vast majority of modern Nicad cells this effect is now
so small as to be negligable.

So now the label 'Memory' has been tagged on to a further problem
associated with Nicad batteries.  This 'new' phenomenon is Crystal
Formation.  Nickel and cadmium are present in crystaline form within
cells.  The smaller these crystals are the better the performance of
the cell.  However over a period of charge - discharge cycles, these
crystals can grow.  When this happens the effective surface area of
the crystal component is reduced which reduces cell performance.  This
is what WE (ie MTBrs) know as the memory effect.  When this happens
the 'effective' capacity of our batteries is reduced (Really the
capacity stays the same but the voltage is reduced [hence the more
proper term for the effect "voltage depression"]. The result is the
same..... dim lights)

The main cause of this crystal growth is when batteries are left in a
charger on trickle charge for days or if they are constantly 'topped up'
with charge. [Ie, the memory effect is caused by overcharging.]

There is a way to prevent this crystal growth from getting out of control.
What we should ALL do to care for our batteries is not necessarily rush out
and buy a Smart charger although this would be the easiest way to look after
them.  WE SHOULD ALL REGULARLY DISCHARGE OUR BATTERIES.  Now hold on, hasn't
it been frequently said here that this should not be done?  Well let me
define what is meant by 'discharge'.  In 'the industry' discharge does NOT
mean flat!  As has been said here by Myra and Matt and others, running
batteries until they are completely flat will damage them, be they Nicad,
NiMh or Lead Acid.  Discharged means technically down to 1volt per cell.
For our lighting purposes this means when the lights start to yellow its
time to recharge.

Now its not necesary to run lights until they are yellow prior to each and
every charge.  If you use your lights to commute every day, then its ok to
simply 'top them up' each evening so long as say once per week you make sure
that you discharge them to the yellow stage before charging.
What this discharging method actually does is break down the large crystals
into nice small pieces again.

So buy a smart charger if you want.  Me? I think I will spend that money
elsewhere and simply follow these guidelines.....

1)  Follow the charging instructions that come with the lights BUT not panic
if I leave them on charge for 4/5 hours longer than I should do.

2)  After 4th/5th ride make sure I discharge them to the yellow stage before
putting them on charge just to break up any of them there sneaky large
crystals.

Nb  if you 'yellow' out your lights on every ride then so much the better.

So there's two fingers up at Smart chargers.

--------------------------------

Myra's summary:

(1) Fast charging your NiCads can kill them unless you're really
careful (watching temperature).

(2) Slow charging can still cause some minor damage (the crystal
growth that Mark describes), resulting in voltage depression, which
can leave you with lights that are dimmer than you expect.

(3) To avoid problems with crystal growth, either use a smart charger
to prevent overcharging, or occasionally discharge to yellow, as Mark
describes.

(4) Under no circumstances is it good to completely and totally
discharge a NiCad battery (that is, several cells in series).  It is
perfectly fine to completely discharge a NiCad cell (one little
cylinder, typically AA or C or D size).
